---
author: "Martin Fränzle"
title: "Why does so much CPS design go on without much formal methods? A plea for developing verification theories bridging exhaustive and statistical correctness arguments, stochasticity, and open systems"
slot: 20
type: invited
length: 45
---

Cyber-physical systems are systems whose design calls for a meet of various engineering disciplines, all with their own mathematical as well as empirical modelling and analysis techniques. Sadly, even after more than half of a century of scientific interest in the control of hybrid discrete-continuous systems and after more than three decades of dedicated conferences and collaborative research agendas unifying theories from dynamical systems, control, and computer science, these methods still do not meet as seamlessly as we in the formal methods community tend to claim. While we, as a formal methods community together with our peers from control theory, have made tremendous progress in the formal verification of hybrid-state dynamical systems and thereby of cyber-physical systems, industrial adoption of these methods remains meagre.  Our perception in the FM community tends to be that this is due to still limited usability and scalability of our tools, and thus to be solved eventually by their further development. I will in my talk argue that the problem actually lies much deeper: all tools and theories around do only cover fragmentary aspects of a CPS's correctness argument, and they unfortunately don't interface well to together provide an overarching  argument. Not only does the impossibility of building 100% correct cyber-physical systems, which is induced by the inherent uncertainties in sensing and component behaviour, force us into quantitative safety arguments, but we then even have to provide such quantitative arguments for open systems, where input distributions may be vague and instationary. And industrial supplier and subcontractor structures also enforce compositional reasoning, asking for inferences combining rigorous verification certificates for one component with statistical evidence from (virtual or physical) experiments for the other. Can we establish compositional verification theories reconciling rigorous, exhaustive and statistical correctness arguments, stochasticity, and open systems? Maybe, and he talk will show some ideas of setting up such a framework (joined work with Pauline Blohm (U Münster), Paula Herber (U Münster), Paul Kröger (U Oldenburg) und Anne Remke (U Münster)). Can we do without such? Maybe not, unless we can live with limited impact.
